Let's just start to run, and then we know it's running.
There it goes.
So, and how do we pronounce your name?
Bellenbach.
Okay, very good.
And so you're the managing director of the press.
Can we just kind of enter the conversation in a way?
Yes, I'm managing director of Yale Press London, and I took over two years ago from John Nicol, who was managing director of
30 years.
Was it 30 years?
Another of these long stayers, you see.
I think it was 31 years when he... I didn't realize it was that long.
Yeah, he's my age.
Yes, he is.
And maybe he's younger than me, in fact.
Early 60s, very young 60s.
And yet he was managing director for 30 years.
Yeah, well, you see, he was brought in, I think it was 74.
Chester hired him from OUP.
I mean, John will tell you this, of course, over lunch,
But Chester, I think, hired John from OUP.
And before that, I mean, London was set up in 61, just as a sort of sales entrepote, really.
And it had a sales manager, and so on.
It was just a selling operation.
And then when Chester hired John, it was to start an editorial list.
And John was the art history editor at OUP in Oxford.
And so he came along here and started commissioning and producing mainly art books.
but with the Mellon Centre for British Art, which has been our twin, really, throughout this process, and is the reason why this office exists at all.
But apparently the Mellon Centre, according to John, right, is that it was hemorrhaging money like crazy, and that John came in and was basically this miracle worker.
Yes.
I mean, he will tell you
more about the specifics.
But, yeah, I mean, the Mellon has a lot of money to spend on British art, and they were probably spending it rather haphazardly.
And then John came, and they set up a list called Studies in British Art, and we've been publishing it ever since, really.
And, you know, it's a huge service for the academic study of British painting and art, and a marvellous thing.
And it underwrites, and it doesn't exactly subsidise, because it pays for the books, but doesn't actually pay for much else.
So our list has a lot of British art in it as a result of that.
And the Mellon Centre, at one stage, we shared offices with them in Bloomsbury Square.
And now they're across the way.
We sort of look at them over there in number 12.
And so we've always been Bloomsbury.
I mean, one of the things that I expect you'll pick up is that Yale has always inhabited these few squares, you know, that Virginia Woolf and...
all that lot inhabited before us, throughout our existence, and actually have always been able to see the University of London.
I mean, from my window I can see the Senate House, so in a way we're on a campus, although it's somebody else's campus.
And it's a very booky area of town, really.
The British Museum is over there, the British Library's not very far.
It feels appropriate and honourable to inhabit this area.
Now, I think Yale...
So many American university presses have offices in the UK, but Yale, this division is really a genuine, authentic publishing house on our own.
We have all the functions of the publishing house, and we produce our own books, and we exchange them.
Apparently, perhaps as many as a third of the list.
Yes, I mean, we always say we produce a third of the books
at a quarter of the cost.
Wow.
That's pretty good.
Yeah, I mean, I think that the line is that we've always, because we've been doing specific series of books in art and in history, that we've produced them more efficiently.
And I think John Nichol, who you'll meet, was a superb producer of books and a buyer of print, and he did it in a very good business head.
And he will say, and I think he's right, that we've made the money for the press over the years.
Because New Haven...
has to do a lot of things out of duty to its university.
So it has a lot of books that don't make money.
So it doesn't actually make an operating profit, whereas we do.
So is that the mandate here?
Well, yeah.
We don't have any endowment here.
I mean, New Haven has an endowment which provides them with a certain chunk of cash every year to subsidize.
We don't.
So we have to operate like a normal business and pay our salaries and not make a loss.
Because if we made a loss, then we think that our
Our masters in New Haven would say, well, what is this operation for?
So what do you try to do differently?
What do we do differently from New Haven?
Well, I mean, I think the main thing is that we are four and a half thousand miles away from the university.
So that liberates us to publish outside the box, really.
I mean, New Haven has, to some extent, to satisfy the academic community, it has to satisfy the academy by publishing a certain number of Yale professors, but also to publish a certain number of monographs, you know, detailed specialist books that these days you can't win with.
Whereas we are free of that, really.
We don't necessarily have to do that.
Although, to an extent, we do publish very specialist books when it strikes us as an extraordinarily important book
But by and large, we go for books that have a bigger market.
We also go for books that are international in their scope.
And that maybe is the big difference between the list, because New Haven publishes... It has an American list, really.
I mean, a lot of its books... But I mean, even so, a lot of its books look at the U.S.
and the U.S.
experience in the world.
And it, like every other American press, it publishes endless books on the American Supreme Court and things like that, which we can't sell here.
And right now is an interesting time because just at the sort of post-9-11 moment when Americans are looking at themselves and wondering why everybody dislikes them.
So New Haven is producing more books about American concerns.
just at the time that the rest of the world is not buying them.
So, I mean, I have great trouble telling my American colleagues that this is a fact, because, you know, America is so big and rich and important and well-funded that it can do what it likes.
And in terms of book publishing, it publishes lots of books about itself.
And then it's always mildly surprised that the rest of the world doesn't want to buy them.
I mean, I'm exaggerating and generalizing, of course, but
That is a syndrome.
When you see a book through the press, what do you perceive as your readership, as your market?
You say, I can't sell here, so are you looking for the British market?
Well, you see, we sell, basically New Haven and London divide the world into two in terms of sales territories.
And they do the U.S.
and Canada and South America and Japan and various other areas, whereas we do Europe.
the Middle East, Africa, and some of the Far East.
So basically we divide the world into two, and we sell into these territories, and then at the end of the year we tot up our sales and see how we've done.
But all of your books are listed in the same catalogue, right?
Yes, exactly.
And so really the person who picks up the spring 06 catalogue doesn't really
know whether or not it's being produced out of the UK or New Haven.
You have to be a very sophisticated reader of a catalogue to pick that up.
One of the things you might ask to see at some point is the catalogues.
London produces a catalogue, and New Haven produces a catalogue, and you will see that they are interestingly dissimilar.
The books that New Haven features at the front are not necessarily the ones we buy.
So there are two different catalogues.
Yeah, absolutely.
We do ours for our markets, and they do theirs.
And I think if you see a few, if you get the two catalogues for a few seasons, you'll pick up, you know, the spirit of it.
I mean, often the very big books are the same, obviously.
The books that, again, generate the cash are the same, and we feature them.
But otherwise, our market receives things differently, and so we feature them differently.
There's something that I've just forgotten in relation to that.
But we do have two catalogues.
Oh, yes, the other thing is...
Your question, would a book buyer know where it came from?
You know, I think, well, you would, as a man who's sensitive to books, you would perceive the difference in design and the jacket and that sort of thing.
I mean, there is, it doesn't take long to see the difference between the two because of the, I mean, American books look American, British books look British, and, you know, it's quite subtle, but it's true.
Would you say that Yale is unique among University Press, and certainly American University Press?
It is, really, because it's the only one that has had this international office.
A true international office.
I mean, the others are sales offices, basically.
Yes, that's right.
I'm amused when I see University of California Press, Berkeley, and London, and the last... Are they kidding?
They don't sell.
They sell.
I just went through their list for the spring.
I mean, it's all...
California themes, and that's a very disappointing list.
Very provincial, in fact, which surprises me.
I mean, the fact that the Chester set up the London office was a brilliant way to make the imprint plausible in the rest of the world, because there's nothing like having an imprint which is publishing books that literary editors here think of theirs, to make it all seem real.
And, I mean, Yale London
I mean, a lot of literary reviewers would see us as a British press.
I mean, they know, obviously, that we're owned by the U.S.
and that we're all yet employees, but they see us as a sort of little local press.
Do they?
Yeah.
And our books go out to them, and they see us as they do Granter or Faber or any of the other presses.
I mean, the only parallel I can think of is Oxford's New York.
Yeah.
Which is the inverse.
Which is the inverse, the other way.
And I know absolutely which Oxford books are... I mean, I've been reviewing books for three years.
So you can tell.
Oh, I can tell instantly.
I mean, if there's a book on jazz, American jazz, or something like that, or the Supreme Court, as you say, at Oxford, that's not...
coming out of here, that's coming out of New York.
Right.
But can you see it from the look of the book as well?
I can, yeah.
Their books almost look like they're done by Random House.
I mean, they're very American, I think, in terms of the... It's the same here, you know.
You'd spot it.
You know, sometimes we dress books up to look as though they are American books, or vice versa, depending on the subject.
So how would you characterize an American look as opposed to, if you could...
Or is it like, just as Potter Stewart says, I know it when I see it?
Yes, exactly that.
I would say generally the jackets look quite deliberately designed and tasteful, whereas ours tend to be more like posters.
I mean, it's odd that, you know, we are the older culture, and yet somehow American books look more old-fashioned than ours do.
And particularly inside, internally, there's a great tradition of
of tasteful design and little effects and little designs.
Do you think this resonates with the reader as much as it does the person who produces it, the editor?
I think so.
You know, it was interesting that we published our bestseller of last autumn was this E. H. Gombrich.
I have that, yeah.
Did that come out of here?
Yeah, that was, that came out of here.
And this is our edition, and you, I don't know, you've seen the U.S.
edition.
I have a U.S.
Which has got sort of raggedy pages.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, and looks slightly greyer, but it's the same internally.
Oh, that's a great little book, actually.
Because we designed it here.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's, we sold almost 100,000 copies of it.
Amazing.
Yeah, that's wonderful.
And, uh, but even... Was that a big surprise, or did you expect that?
No, no, well, we knew that Gombrich, of course, was the author of the story of art.
Mm-hmm.
and a big figure, and that, you know, basically high-profile author, large subject, little history of the world, you know, you've got two of the components of a successful book.
Also, the fact that he writes it so beautifully, you know, and he's such a humane and sensitive man.
So we knew it would do well.
I mean, we thought that people might say, oh, what a nice little curiosity, what a sweet little book.
Go away.
But it got terrific press, too.
Yeah, because it's a good book, you know.
You know, from this, you know how history fits together in a way that most of us never do.
You know how it links.
Now tell me a little bit about yourself.
Did you come to Yale from another university press?
No, I came from Weidenfeld.
Okay, so you came from the trade press, but I was looking after their academic list, which wasn't very academic for the bit.
And then I was approached by John Nicol to come here 20 years ago, 1985, to boost the history publishing.
I mean, I'm really a history editor, and John was essentially an art editor.
So when John Ryden and John Nicol decided to expand London from about 12, 15 titles back in the early 80s to now we do 70 or 80 titles a year,
they looked for another editor and that was when I came across.
So I hadn't worked in a university press before and that was one of the attention, one of the attractions for an editor of serious books is to have access to the US market and also an imprint like Yale's which is very prestigious and impressive.
So the idea of doing my kind of books which are
history books not only for academics but for the trade market, with a big imprint like Yale, and being able to publish directly into the U.S.
I mean, at Weidenfeld, like Knopf or anything, across the water you sell to another press.
And so you lose your book in that market.
Whereas here, if I sign a book, then I go to New Haven, I talk to the reps, it's my book.
If there are queries, it comes to me.
So you don't lose it.
So as an editor, you control the world.
It's amazing that you pick up a book published in Great Britain by Faber and Faber or something like that.
Yes.
See what's going on here?
Yes, and it feels different.
I mean, who are your publishers?
HarperCollins.
Right.
So do they do it both sides?
Yeah.
Right.
My first two books were with Holton.
They were so big.
It was a 668-page book.
They were scared to publish it over here.
But, you know, even my books that haven't been published here have had wonderful reviews over here.
Right.
The TLS gave me a bigger review than the New York Times.
Go figure that out, you know.
I can't figure it out.
But, I mean, now with Amazon and globalization, there aren't territories anymore.
You can get, my books sell very well on Amazon UK, as opposed, you know, not just Amazon, I'm sure.
So she has a funny situation.
Do you see, I'd love to have your thoughts on what the function, the role, the 21st century role of a university press is.
Because whatever it is, Yale's got it right.
I mean, we've actually had university presses fold in the United States in the last couple of years.
A number of them, Northeastern, comes to mind.
Yes, Stanford.
Stanford.
And another one.
And all the others operate in the red, Yale, three or four years in a row now, operating in the black, almost unprecedented.
It's amazing that the university press should actually make money.
Yes, yes, it is.
But, I mean, bear in mind that we hired our director from basic books.
And in a way, we are becoming more like basic books, paying advances for books that we didn't used to pay, giving them a trade treatment,
I mean, as you already know, our list is divided into trade books, and scholarly books, and art books, and reference.
I mean, they pay me in advance.
Yes, yes.
And we do.
I mean, sometimes we pay... It's not a HarperCollins advance, but so what?
This is fun, you know?
The prestige of writing a book for Yale is kind of cool.
I mean, in the old days, we almost thought people should pay us to publish with us.
Well, that was the...
Unfortunately, that was what... And now we're competing, you know, we're buying books from agents, we're competing with Penguin Press and HarperCollins and, you know, the Classy Imprints.
According to John Wrighton, I mean, in his view, Yale begins as a press that, or the university press in the United States, almost develops at the same time as scholarship becomes a profession in the United States.
They almost...
emerge at the same time.
Yeah, that's interesting.
And of course how things change, and they weren't expected to make money necessarily.
No, we weren't.
I mean, I think most university presses were expected not to lose it.
And some of them, of course, make big money.
Oxford University Press gives 10, 20 million pounds to the university every year.
Amazing.
Cambridge should do a lot better than it does, it seems to me.
Yes, but they don't do very exciting books, do they?
No.
But, I mean, your question is more what happens to the book, of course, and what is the role of the university press in a culture in which many of our books will be electronic?
And the answer, I guess, is gatekeeping, really choosing.
I mean, the great, the grand publishing projects, those
the Founding Fathers type thing.
These are basically... Can't do them.
And nobody's buying them.
I mean, you can't sell reference as a book these days very much.
I mean, you can sell them.
That's a good point.
I haven't heard it expressed quite like that.
I like that.
Go ahead.
Because, I mean, obviously, for large books which present factual data, which is always changing, it's far better to have it in a
in a form that can develop and grow and have new editions, rather than these colossal great books that cost a fortune and are sold only to libraries.
And libraries, more than anyone else, are aware of the electronic future.
Everyone at Yale told me there was a time, once upon a time, they had standing orders for books.
You could almost guarantee that 6,500 copies of a book would be sold.
And now if you get 600 or 800 copies and the prices go up,
It changes the entire dynamic.
That used to be why university presses had so many series.
Because if you had a series in masterworks of Western culture, then everyone would just buy it automatically.
Once they're committed to it, they have to see it through.
But now they don't, you see.
They buy books individually.
So we have series as a way of attracting authors.
And plus you have universities, I don't know if they do the same thing here, but I wrote about this and one of my books wrote that.
Universities actually establish consortia, like out in western Massachusetts, for instance.
You have Smith, Amherst, Mount Holyoke, Hampshire, and University of Massachusetts.
If, let's say, Smith buys, well, they'll probably all get that book, but, you know, Charles I.
Well, all five won't get it, because they have a consortial agreement.
Whereas in the old days, all five of these libraries might be buying the same book.
Only one of them is buying it now.
And a lot of these institutions are doing this.
Yeah, it is.
I mean, it's partly that university libraries spend so much of their income on journals and serials and things, and less and less of it on books.
I think it's like 25 cents of
25% of the library budget is spent on books as a general rule.
Yeah, I know, it's shocking.
It's amazing when you see those figures.
So we have to find our buyers outside the Academy, and that's the story of University Presses.
So you have to have a certain kind of book to reach those people.
I have to say, long before I was invited to do this project for Yale, I just regard the Yale art books as, by far,
I mean, I've been reviewing them for 25 years.
The most extraordinary art books, by far.
They're the most beautiful.
They have the best scholarship.
They're not these little vapid things with pretty pictures.
I mean, they're... Yes, they're real books, which have illustrations that are integral to the text.
And it's amazing how year after year after year, you still do 15 or 20 of them, however many.
Every one of them, you want to have every one.
They're so wonderful.
Well, I mean, John Nichols.
And I guess that's John Nichols.
John Nichols.
He's the genius about that.
And if we can continue that now without him, we'll be doing well.
I mean, fortunately, we have two art editors in this office who are trained by John and are very good.
And then there's Patricia Fidler in the US office who is extremely good.
So we have three full-time art history editors pushing out books at a huge rate.
And I think we must be the most...
the highest quality art to publish in the world.
Oh, I think without peer.
I mean, there are other presses like Biden and Thompson and Tash.
I see them all.
Who do, you know, what they do.
I get a ton of review books.
I've been doing this for 25 or 30 years.
I review for half a dozen, ten newspapers, and especially at the holidays I do these big... So, I mean, I get the books, and I really do compare them.
Abrams used to do a nice job.
Yeah, they had a good list.
They used to.
Not anymore.
There's some nice tashin, I think that's some nice stuff.
But yours are so superior.
Well, our text is good, you see.
I mean, the scholarship, the text is outstanding.
But John, I mean, if you remember, ask him about the problems facing art history publishers and the reasons why so few of us survive.
And he will say, I'm sure, it's the cost of the images.
It's the picture archives and the museums and galleries who are charging more and more.
So what's the trick?
Well, I mean, the trick is to be, you know, deft of foot and choose where you're going to get your illustrations, and in a way to make the authors pay for them.
But it gets harder and harder because all these museums and galleries regard their picture library as a source of funds.
So they screw us for money.
I'm quoting John Wright.
I brought the transcript.
I transcribed these things myself.
Right.
And so I just thought I'd read his on the way over.
Couldn't sleep on the airplane last night, so I was reading.
But he said, years ago, when there was admittedly much organization whose function was to publish works which no one would read, he said there was quite naturally as little
general interest in its organization as it was in its function.
University presses at one point were, I guess to go back to what we were saying, were not expected to produce books that were compelling and interesting and that would actually sell in the marketplace.
Yale has actually had two books that have sold over a million copies.
One of the great publishing stories of Yale is Eugene O'Neill,
Yeah, sure.
I've got that one nailed.
And then they do things like the Yale Younger Poets series.
Sure, yeah.
Which is fantastic.
Which is good.
Basically sustains American poetry in its own way.
And they've had some great Jonathan Spence, Jerry Pelican.
That's right.
You see, the difference is that if we have a book that sells extremely well, it's because it's an extremely good book.
you know, a serious book by a very intelligent person who's written essentially a scholarly book which crosses all the borders, all the frontiers.
Whereas the trade press will often do a book which is not necessarily a good book, but it's by a celebrity author or a celebrity subject.
And in theory, if somebody came to us offering a book like that, we would turn it down.
You know, I mean, if Jackie Collins wanted to write about, you know, Hollywood children, you know.
I mean, we would say no.
Not only could we not afford to, but it wouldn't get through our committee.
So what's the sniff test?
What are you looking for?
What, in your view, makes it... It's quality.
And you know it when you see it?
It's intellectual quality, yeah.
I mean, I don't know whether this has come up in New Haven, but when Gore Vidal was... He wrote a book for us in our American Icon series about the Founding Fathers about two years ago.
That sold very well, 100,000 copies.
And Jonathan Brent was the author.
But when he took it to the Committee on Publications of the U.S.
faculty, they were sniffy about that.
Does Gore Vidal cut the mustard?
Is this book good enough?
Does it have factual errors?
Will we have egg on our face?
And I was at that meeting, actually.
It was quite interesting.
Normally our committee just rubber stamps or proves and says, great book, great book.
But that one was very dodgy.
Well, do you think it was some sort of animus with Vidal as an individual?
Maybe, but I think it was some of that.
But also, you know, they were thinking, what is the role of a university press?
If, I mean, Gord Vidal can get published by anyone.
What we have to do is publish things... Probably for a lot more money, too, in fact.
Yes, yes.
And that, you know, that is quite a neat question.
You know, should we do books that can perfectly well be done by somebody else?
Should we...
exercise our skills in making a very special scholarship available.
And the truth is, if we did only that, it would be very hard to survive.
So we have to bend sometimes and go for celebrities like Nick Bersbeck.
Don't make me blush now.
So what are some of your favorite Yale books?
I tell you, there are some history books that have really won all the prizes.
Oh, that's Thomas Cranmer.
The thumping great history book.
And that won loads of prizes here.
This is Thomas Cranmer.
Dermot McCulloch.
D-I-A-R-M-A-I.
For the sake of my tape, we've got a McCulloch.
M-A-C-C-U-L-O-O-C-H.
And that came out as quite a detailed historical biography.
But because it's so good, it got huge reviews.
It won trade prizes.
It sold a lot of copies for us.
You know, that's exactly what we do best.
We take an unlikely book and make it work.
About five pounds.
Absolutely.
Because it's good.
I mean, that's, I think, is at the bottom of what we do, because it's good.
You know what's emerging here, which is kind of fun, and when I come back again, I'll go over this stuff, and I'm hoping we can get together at a later time, and I can perhaps have some more focused questions.
Sure.
But this idea that Yale is really a British press, is that a stretch to suggest that?
No, I mean, you mean Yale, London.
That's what I mean, yeah.
Well, it is.
It's not just this outpost.
No, it's not just an extension.
Where Yale is out here fishing for titles to bring back under the big, I'm mixing my metaphors here, put under the big umbrella of Yale, it's really a very distinctive
kind of a book that is cognizant of its readership here and the culture that's producing it.
I think that's exactly it.
We aren't just an outpost of New Haven.
We are a sort of separately constituted, self-conscious publisher of our own with our own spirit.
I mean, we are part of Yale, and we take that seriously, and we
That is the reason we exist.
But the books we do can be different in their nature and their character from the ones that New Heaven does.
And they fit the list.
We slot them into the overall list.
See, generally, when a university press develops, I think, well, is it supposed to support the curriculum?
You know, when someone thinks this is a university press,
part of a university, although for half of its existence, Yale Press was a private company.
It just had the Yale name.
I mean, there was clearly a lot more to it than that, but for some years there was this sense that you at least had to support the curriculum.
But you don't feel any obligation to do that over here?
No.
I mean, we... I mean, you're 3,400 miles away from the campus.
That's right, yeah.
No, we don't feel an obligation to produce Yale authors, but we do feel an obligation to reflect the best and the most advanced in the areas we publish.
So I would see it as my obligation to find the best history writers at the very edge of their subject, you know, the people who are making real changes in research.
But you know, the other interesting thing about Yale is that we...
We don't do anything that other presses think makes money.
I mean, we don't do textbooks.
Well, not deliberately.
Some of our books... We may have done some textbooks.
Yeah, but they're not like McGraw-Hale, are they?
I mean, they don't say, you know, World Civilization I. And we don't do professional things.
We don't do law.
We don't do medicine.
We don't really do...
business and economics.
We don't do the things that most publishers make most of their money from.
In one sense, it's crazy.
We do all the things that nobody else can make work.
It's harder to... Don't mind me.
Taking pictures of everybody.
My pictures are very good, by the way.
Yeah, sure, I'm sure.
Not to worry.
I didn't mean to distract you.
No, no, I was thinking about this because normally one gets on with one's job and answers the mail, you know, and then somebody comes and says, what's the special characteristic of your press?
And it makes you think, really.
And your statement that this is, to some extent, a British press in its feel is right.
I mean, I go back to what I said at the beginning, that we, I think we have a more international
take on things than New Haven.
Because if we did books about the legal system in the UK or Tony Blair's New Labour Party, we wouldn't sell them.
And certainly New Haven wouldn't sell them.
I mean, they'd say, what are you bringing books like this?
But they can bring a book about, you know, neocons and so on.
Because they're Americans and it does well for them.
Do they have veto power over the years?
Yes.
Well, they can...
The Committee on Publications can always say no.
And indeed, I guess John Donatage could say to us, no, I don't want that.
But in practice, one would argue for one's own book.
And they certainly have the confidence.
I mean, you wouldn't have this position if they didn't trust your judgment.
Yes, if they don't like my books, they can hire somebody else.
I mean, clearly they have confidence in you to come in with...
projects that you feel are going to kind of complement the list.
I mean, as you know, for editors, it's your own sort of passion and hunger that enables you to find books, and then you have to sell that passion to your colleagues.
And we all sit down at editorial meetings, and we phone in from the U.S., or vice versa, and we talk about the list and the books, and does something fit, and how's that going to do?
So, you know, it's a joint thing.
Are there any books that you wish you'd done?
That I haven't?
Yeah.
God.
Yes.
I wish I could remember.
I mean, there are always books like that.
I mean, both.
You see books in other people's lists that you think, you know, if only.
And you see books that you miss, that you have a chance and you miss, and they go on to do very well, and you realize that you goofed.
So I'm sure.
But I can't think of anything.
I can't think that I... So are you competing with the trade houses, do you think?
Yeah.
Yes, more so than with the other university presses.
I'm not aware of competing with Oxford or Cambridge.
Sometimes I'm aware of competing with Harvard or Princeton, say.
I like Yale's list much better than Harvard's.
Princeton has some nice things.
I like Hopkins.
I actually like Johns Hopkins.
Yeah, Hopkins is a nice list.
And we carry that list.
You see, we have a representation company that sells books into the trade, which is wholly owned by Yale London, but is separate.
And Kate Pocock, whom you've seen this afternoon, she's in charge of that, so she'll tell you.
But amongst the lists we carry is Johns Hopkins.
So we sell the books here.
But no, we compete.
I mean, I am competing.
with Penguin Press, with HarperCollins, with Weinfeld and Nicholson, with Faber, with those kind of serious nonfiction publishers that can afford to pay good money for nonfiction authors.
Now, are you still considered a non-profit entity?
Yes.
And that kind of has some complications, doesn't it, I think?
I mean, here we say we're a charity.
A charity, right.
And we are a charity, so we don't pay tax on our profits.
But then we don't make a whole lot of profit.
Because if we did, we'd just plow it back into the box.
Because we don't have any shareholders.
So nobody's waiting to get money from us.
I mean, obviously, if one makes a better margin one year, then you can pay your staff better.
You can pay bigger advances.
You can hire that picture researcher you've needed for years, but then they've been able to afford that sort of thing.
But we aren't motivated by profit.
We're motivated to
pay our costs and to pay our authors properly and pay our bills properly, but we aren't motivated to have a big balance in the bank.
Probably the successful university press of the 21st century will have to follow the Yale model, would you think?
It has to have a business sense.
It has to view the entire world as its market.
I think the difference between us and other American universities is that they publish from and about the U.S.
And Yale London means that we publish about the world, and we think about the world as a market.
I mean, when we think about a book, we think, how's it going to sell in Australia or in South Africa?
Because those markets are real for us, and we service them, and we have reps there.
I mean, Oxford has always done this.
They've published for the world, and they're hugely successful.
But you take a press like California, I'm not sure that they do that.
I take a look at their most recent list.
I feel obligated to at least request a half a dozen titles off the checklist just to be decent.
But the ones that really interested me, I can't even, so arcane and so really focused on California and gender issues, I would say.
Birds of Southern California.
Birds are on one bird thing after the other.
Ecology, earthquakes.
Yeah.
That's right.
I suppose, you know, or you go to New Mexico, it's, you know, Indians, or anything else, it's the Civil War.
That's something that university presses do really well.
They do their own locality in a very scholarly way.
You know, the flora and fauna of Oklahoma.
Yeah, but they also lose money.
Yes, yes.
But I bet those books lose less, actually.
Well, because they stay on the backlist forever, too.
They pay nothing to get them, probably.
That's right.
But I bet in the long term, those are the moneymakers for Oklahoma and Louisiana and stuff.
It's the books about their own backyard.
Louisiana does fiction, which is amazing.
That's strange.
I don't see how you can.
But they do.
They probably do half a dozen novels a year.
Yes, I know.
We say we don't deliberately.
That's funny.
Who knows?
What do you think I need to pursue here?
This is still, you know, I haven't started writing this thing yet.
I'm ready to.
I think I've got, basically for me, being invited to come in and to write something to celebrate and to observe the centennial.
And I think it's going to be fun.
I told John Donatich, I said,
I love it that you only think this is going to sell 1,200 or 1,500 copies.
I said, I'd be shocked.
I know I sell 10,000 copies straight without one edit.
HarperCollins, if there's anything that ticks me off about HarperCollins is that they don't do any publicity for me.
Because you sell yourself.
I sell myself.
The first edition of my first printing of this
My most recent book is 25,000 copies, and I think in three months we're close.
Not bad.
I don't know where it is, but in fact, Janice checked it for me at Yale.
They normally don't tell you how you're doing.
She looked it up on Bookscan.
Yeah, don't tell anyone that she did this for me.
Why not?
She saw they were getting through the 25,000 copies.
Well, no, they weren't at the 25,000, but they were halfway there, and that was two months ago, and I know it's still doing.
Yeah.
But, Nick, that's because you're a brand, aren't you?
I am a brand, yeah.
People who read you know the sorts of things you do.
Yeah, but it hurts when there's somebody out in San Francisco that says, gee, I didn't know you had a new book out.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
People can't buy it if they don't know it's there.
You know, they didn't send me out.
They really cut back.
And I don't blame them, honestly.
It's cost an awful lot of money to send me from Boston to L.A.
and just spend two or three days out there.
I mean, that costs a lot of money.
I can see it, but by the same token, you shouldn't measure it just by how many books you sell as signing it.
They should regard your core readership as the base and then seek to extend it.
Yeah, but I think that there's a... In fact, my editor at Harper's is Hugh Van Dusen, who's a famous name, and he's a lovely guy.
And when he found out I was doing this project for Yale, he was so excited.
He said, I can't wait to read.
This is very friendly with the people at Yale.
He said, you will be writing the first, I'm sure, but the first really good history of an American publisher.
Because we haven't had one.
No.
They've all been just sort of duty for books.
Boring.
There's so many good stories here.
Yeah.
So many good story angles.
And so I am always looking for the narrative.
Yeah.
I mean, obviously, it'll have to be chronological to an extent.
To an extent.
But not.
Not necessarily.
Not imprisoned by it.
Oh, not at all.
No, no, the stories are good.
I mean, in a way, just as you are... This is a great story, by the way.
This UK story is a major story.
Because it's the only one of its kind.
Yeah, it's great.
And it's changed the Yale brand, really.
Say that again?
It's what?
It's changed the Yale brand.
That's what you said.
Okay, that's what I thought you said.
Because, I mean, I think that, just as you like Yale books, there are an awful lot of people out there who know a Yale book and sort of know what a Yale book represents.
And...
we have created our brand, we've created our reputation.
And he has got, pardon my grief, but has balls, you know, I mean, they'll do things like the annals of communism or something.
That's right, yeah, yes.
You know, it's a gutsy, fun thing to do, and it's been wildly successful.
And, you know, it requires political courage, because...
It's taking a political line, in a way.
Yeah, I mean, I think we do, in that phrase, think outside the box, and we're not trapped by a scholarly convention, but at the same time, we don't do things that are crazy.
I mean, everything we do has to be read by one or two outside readers who have substance.
Because, yeah, there's a big
an expensive name, and we don't want anyone to say, why is Yale doing that?
I mean, sometimes you do.
You publish a book, and a review says, why is Yale doing this?
And you think, oh, God, that's bad.
Well, the Vinland map.
Yeah, well, that's, well, John Ryden will have told you about that story, won't he?
They've all said to me, what are you going to do with the Vinland map?
I said, I've got to report it.
Come on.
Yeah, that's a good story.
It's a good story.
Don't be ashamed of it.
It's a fun story.
It's a good story.
But, no, whether or not you keep insisting that it's
authentic, that's another thing.
But what's wrong with that?
It's fun.
Sure.
What's wrong with it?
You can't get everything right.
I love the story of how they got Long Day's Journey into Night.
I don't think I know that.
Well, Bennett Cerf was O'Neill's editor for Random House, but he promised Eugene O'Neill that he wouldn't publish that play for 50 years.
It was so fiercely autobiographical.
And, of course, there was honor in publishing back in those days, and he died.
But then the widow said, well, I think we can.
This is something that's pretty good.
So Yale was under no obligation not to do it, and because the materials had gone to the Yale Library, they published it, and it's a million-seller, you know, and everything wins a Pulitzer Prize.
And Bennett says, I can't.
I promised Gene I wouldn't do it.
So Yale had no such compunction?
None.
And they published, you know, three other plays after that.
It's a pretty interesting story.
So I'm trying to find a correspondence that documents that.
Yeah, of course.
This is unprecedented for me.
I mean, they've given me a graduate student to help with their research.
I've never had anything.
I don't even know how to do it.
How to instruct her, you know?
I'm used to doing all my own work and checking out.
So where are Yale New Haven's archives?
Are they in the basement of that building?
No, actually, a lot of the things are in the Beinecke, and most of them are in Sterling Library, especially the correspondence and things like that.
Yeah, because publishers' archives are wonderful.
Yeah, really.
All these correspondents are great authors.
The University of Texas has tons of them.
I'm sure, yeah.
Thank God somebody's keeping them.
Yeah, the Lilly Library has a lot of them, too.
I mean, you sit here as an editor, and over the years letters come from Isaiah Berlin and others, and you think, oh, this is my file, you know.
That's great stuff.
I just hope it survives.
So if you were to give me some guidance on where you would like to see something like this go, what would you like to know about Yale?
Well, I mean, I am interested in the international dynamic and the relationship between the two offices, because I think that's special.
Who else do you think I should talk to here on a future trip?
There's a woman called Stephanie Sutton, who predated John Nichol, who was here as a
She's still around.
Yeah, she's still around.
She's an Austrian, and she worked with Chester very closely.
So Stephanie would be... So she'd know Chester.
Oh, yes.
Getting Chester perceptions are hard.
Yeah, I didn't know Chester.
I mean, I saw him, but I didn't work here when he was a director.
I mean, he seemed more English than English, to some extent.
Sharp problems.
That's right, absolutely.
So she worked for Chester.
She worked for Chester, yes, in the sales office here.
And Chester used to come, I gather, by, you know, announce his arrival and stay at the Savoy or carriages and have audiences with people.
I mean, this was the grand old stuff.
And I think he quite liked it that when John Nichol came, he, um,
John's great success was a book called Life in the English Country House by Mark Gerard, which of course is, it's a glorious book, but it's about the lifestyles of the rich and famous.
It has a certain snob element, but it's a beautiful book.
It's a very, very successful book.
Yeah, it's one of our most successful books from this office.
And John was responsible.
Didn't they do Cut in the Web of Words early on, too?
Yeah, that's right.
Which is a great book.
I love that book.
That's a nice book.
You'd think that would have been done by Oxford Press, you know?
Yes, you see, John, I think, met the daughter, who wrote it.
I mean, all publishing connections are serendipitous, aren't they?
And it's to do with connections and ideas and who you like.
You do have to publish books by people you like.
You can't publish books by people you don't like.
You can't work with publishers you don't like.
When I was writing a weekly column, you know, 20 years, and there was always an interview with a major author, and people would say to me, how come you always like these books?
I mean, why don't you ever know?
I said, what do you expect me to choose somebody I don't like?
I'm going to waste my time if I...
a book I don't want to read or spend an afternoon talking to an author who bores me?
I mean, what's the point, right?
You have to like the person or the work that you're dealing with.
The other thing that I'd like to know, and I don't know the answer to this, is to what extent Yale Press represents or
epitomizes Yale as a university within U.S.
society, and how different it is from Harvard and Princeton and Chicago.
To what extent does the character of the university determine the sort of press it is?
Or maybe it doesn't.
Well, it didn't for a while, I think.
Which I find very interesting.
Gaddis Smith, who's doing a history of Yale.
Right, is he?
A major history of Yale.
He's been working on it for years and years.
One thing he is not including is the press.
And I interviewed him and he said, so he gave me a couple of things that he'd really like to see done.
And I said, well, how come you're not doing that?
He said, well, for many years it wasn't part of the university.
And he said, for many years it was also a political organ.
They published the kinds of things that would be unheard of today.
very conservative things, anti-Rosevelt, FDR things, polemical things.
You know, you just would never, and if they gave me a couple titles years ago, take a look at these.
Really?
Not to embarrass anybody, but it's part of the history.
Yeah, sure.
You know, I mean, this is how the thing evolved.
But it kind of,
It plays into what you're suggesting.
For me, I'm not American, so I don't know quite what the universities represent within American culture, but I look at Harvard's books and they're very controlled, very intellectual, sometimes wonderful, classy product, but small groups, fewer of them and more contained, more self-conscious.
first started revealing books and getting the catalogs from university presses, it was amazing how many books sounded so wonderful by their title and what they purported to be doing.
And then you get the book and they're so filled with jargon, they're so uninvitingly written, boring, you know, and I think one of the things I've always liked about Yale books is that there is an attempt
to engage a reader outside of the immediate circle of the writer.
I think the Yale staff, people such as yourself, have some sort of feeling for the generalists out there.
Yes, we do, absolutely, and deliberately we do.
And you see such wonderful subjects.
I've gotten so many good ideas that I've used
or material, you know, properly cited and everything like that, but it's boring.
I mean, the way it's been produced, not your books, but, you know, some of it.
But Nick, then, why would someone like you not publish with us?
I mean, would your agent not sell you to us because we couldn't afford you or because you wouldn't think we could sell enough?
I make my living as a writer.
Sure, yeah.
Sure, but I mean,
My agent actually advised against doing this book.
Really?
Yeah.
I shouldn't have practice on the tape.
And I actually did the contract with Yale.
Directly?
Directly.
I see.
Because the agent saw it was not going to be a money-making thing.
Well, I live 90 minutes from New Haven.
Yeah.
And I'm between books, trade books, and I didn't want to fall too hard in the heels of this one
with the next one, and I want to think about what I want to do, and my wife loves Yale.
That matters.
And this will throw up things that might generate other ideas for you.
I like the idea of doing a book for Yale.
It is cool.
It's really nice.
At my age, I'll be 63 in a couple of weeks.
to have a Yale title.
And that, you know, it'll look good.
It will look very good, and it's also, I love, I love doing things that has such low expectations.
Don't quote me on this, but I know what... You can surprise people.
I can surprise people.
My first book, nobody in New York wanted to publish it.
I mean, the first printing was 5,800 copies.
It's got 120,000 copies in print now, you know.
Nobody wanted it.
It was out there for 13 months before Holt.
The feeling was, who's interested in a book about bibliomaniacs, which is what A Gentle Madness was all about.
I said, well, other bibliomaniacs might be interested in it.
But anyway, the expectations for it were... Even Holt put it at the back of the catalog, half a page.
It was just one of these things that...
To this day, 11 years after it's published, it has only been one ad bought for that book.
It was a little two-column drop-in in the New York Review of Books for Christmas 1995.
And other than that, it just had wonderful reviews.
It did very well.
But if a press is publishing 25,000 copies, they must surely back that up with some sort of marketing thing.
I mean, if they don't, you're an absolute gem.
Well, I'll tell you.
It's without a great deal of effort for us.
Well, that's what they figure, you know, that my library sales are terrific.
Yeah, I bet they are.
This new book is called Every Book It's Reader.
Yeah, right.
And that's one of S. N. Ranganathan, the Indian library scientist.
He had five cardinal rules of libraries.
The reader's time is precious.
Books are for use.
The library is a growing organism that's like science fiction.
How do you pronounce your name?
Nicole, Nick, Nickel.
Okay, good.
I'm just going to put that right there.
Actually, it's going too fast.
Very flattering things.
Right, so it hits the market it's intended for, but then the publisher's job is to extend that market.
I think they're happy with what they get.
Well, not many people do 25,000 copies just like that.
Raise your demands next time.
Well, it's one of the reasons that the Yale thing is good.
It's allowing me to...
I think my next book's going to be a lot more commercial in any way, in any case.
I think it's a fabulous idea, but I haven't pitched it yet, we'll see.
Right, it's a secret.
Well, you won't go and hire somebody to do it.
I won't, no.
Well, you'll know.
No, I swear.
Well, I think...